Arithmetic with fractions

ARITHMETIC

AUTHOR

Donald Campbell

SUMMARY
Arithmetic with fractions involves combining, comparing, and scaling parts of a whole through addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Mastering these operations on fractions is essential, as these operations are widely used in everyday situations such as cooking, construction, finance, science, or in any application where quantities must be measured, divided, or compared accurately.

Before reading this guide, it is recommended that you read Guide: Introduction to fractions.

In Guide: Introduction to fractions, you saw that a fraction represents part of a whole, and that it consists of a numerator and a denominator. This guide explains how to add, subtract, multiply and divide fractions. It explores the reasoning and methods behind applying these four main arithmetic operations, showing how the core concepts of fractions can be extended to calculations.

Adding and subtracting fractions

Imagine you have two equal-sized chocolate bars. One bar is split into four equal parts and you eat one piece. This means that one fourth of the first bar has been eaten. Suppose the other bar is split into six equal parts and you eat a piece, which means that one sixth of the second bar has been eaten.

Therefore, the total amount of chocolate bar that you have eaten is one fourth plus one sixth period

At first glance, it might seem natural to add the numerators and the denominators separately, but this would give two tenths, which is incorrect. The reason for this is that the parts being added are not the same because they are not the same size; quarters and sixths are different-sized pieces of a whole. This leads into the golden rule of adding and subtracting things:

Important
Golden rule of adding/subtracting fractions

You can only add or subtract things that are the same.

So to add or subtract fractions fairly, the parts being combined must be the same size.

If both bars are divided into twelve equal parts, equivalent fractions can be found for the amounts eaten from both bars. For more on finding equivalent fractions, please see Guide: Introduction to fractions. 2 lines Line 1: blank one fourth equals sign with times 3 over it 3 over 12 Line 2: blank one sixth equals sign with times 2 over it 2 over 12

Both fractions now share the same denominator, meaning the pieces scoffed from each bar are the same size. You can now add both pieces of chocolate together to get one fourth plus one sixth equals 3 over 12 plus 2 over 12 equals 5 over 12

Note
Adding and subtracting fractions

To add or subtract fractions, the denominators of both fractions must be the same according to the golden rule above.

If the fractions already have the same denominator, add or subtract the numerators and keep the same denominator.

If the fractions have different denominators, rewrite them as equivalent fractions so that the two new fractions have the same denominator. Then, add or subtract the numerators and keep the same denominator.

Note
Example 1

Calculate two sevenths plus three sevenths.

The fractions have the same denominator so they can be added directly.

So you can add the numerators and keep the same denominator to get two sevenths plus three sevenths equals the fraction with numerator 2 plus 3 and denominator 7 equals five sevenths

You should always look to see if the fraction can be simplified further. In this case, there are no common factors other than 1 so the fraction is already in its simplest form.

To add or subtract fractions with different denominators, you must first find a common denominator. A common denominator is a number that can be evenly divided by both of the original denominators.

A common denominator can always be found by multiplying the two denominators together. For example, for one fourth and one sixth, you could use 4 times 6 equals 24 as a common denominator.

But in the example above, 12 was used as the common denominator. Why can you use this number?

The problem is that multiplying the denominators can often result in working with very large numbers, especially when it comes to simplifying the resulting fraction. A more reliable method is to find the lowest common multiple of the denominators. (It’s important to note that the lowest common multiple is not the same thing as the highest common factor from Guide: Introduction to fractions.)

Note
Multiples, common multiples, and the lowest common multiple

A multiple of a number is the result of multiplying that number by any whole number.

When comparing the multiples of two (or more) numbers, you can find their common multiples. The numbers that appear in both lists of multiples are the common multiples.

The lowest common multiple is the smallest positive number in the list of common multiples.

To find the lowest common multiple:

List the first few multiples of the first number.

List the first few multiples of the second number.

Identify the common multiples (the numbers that appear in both lists).

The smallest of these common multiples is the lowest common multiple.

If you do not find any common multiples in your initial lists, then extend them by listing more multiples until you find a match.

You can also find the lowest common multiple by multiplying the two numbers together and dividing by their highest common factor.

Note
Example 2

Find the lowest common multiple of 4 and 6.

Start by identifying the first few multiples of 4. These are the numbers that are the result of multiplying 4 by any whole number. Multiples of 4 colon 4 8 12 16 20 24 dot dot dot

Now identify the first few multiples of 6. These are the numbers that are the result of multiplying 6 by any whole number. Multiples of 6 colon 6 12 18 24 30 36 dot dot dot

The numbers that appear in both lists are the common multiples. sans serif Common multiples colon 12 24 dot dot dot

The smallest number appearing in this list of common multiples is the lowest common multiple. sans serif lowest common multiple colon 12

Tip

If you would like to check your answers for the lowest common multiple of two integers, you can use our calculator at Calculator: Highest common factor, lowest common multiple.

Using the lowest common multiple provides the smallest denominator, which reduces the chances of errors in the final simplifying step.

This smallest value is also called the lowest common denominator. For the example of the chocolate bars, the lowest common denominator is 12. The numerators of the original fractions must also be scaled to ensure the fractions remain equivalent.

Note
Example 3

Calculate one half minus five sixths.

The fractions have different denominators so they cannot be subtracted directly. You will then need to find the lowest common denominator.

You can start by identifying the multiples of the denominators 2 and 6. 4 lines Line 1: Multiples of 2 colon 2 4 6 8 10 12 dot dot dot Line 2: Multiples of 6 colon 6 12 18 dot dot dot Line 3: sans serif Common multiples colon 6 12 dot dot dot Line 4: sans serif lowest common multiple colon 6

The lowest common multiple is 6, so you can rewrite both fractions so that they both have a denominator of 6. 2 lines Line 1: blank one half equals sign with times 3 over it three sixths Line 2: blank five sixths equals sign with times 1 over it five sixths

Now that both fractions have the same denominator, you can now subtract the numerators. three sixths minus five sixths equals the fraction with numerator 3 minus 5 and denominator 6 equals negative 2 over 6

Simplifying the fraction gives one half minus five sixths equals negative 2 over 6 equals negative 1 over 3 equals negative one third and this is your final answer.

In the interactive figure below, you can use the sliders to set the numerator and the denominator for the first two fractions (blue and red). The figure visually displays these two original fractions on the left. It then shows them converted into equivalent fractions with the lowest common denominator. Finally, the bars on the right show their sum, stacking the two amounts. The complete calculation steps, including any simplification or conversion to a mixed number, are shown in the box at the bottom.

Multiplying fractions

Multiplying fractions means finding a fraction of another fraction. one half times one third sans serif quotation mark a half of a third quotation mark

When you multiply two fractions that are both less than 1, the result is smaller than both of the original fractions because you are taking a part of a part. This is different from multiplying whole numbers greater than 1, where multiplying makes numbers bigger.

Imagine you have yet another delicious chocolate bar – probably from Cantor’s Confectionery. Suppose you divide it vertically into three equal parts (thirds) and cover the first part so that one third of the bar is covered. Suppose you now divide the same bar horizontally into two equal parts (halves) and cover the first part so that one half of the bar is covered. The overlapping section shows the part that is both a half and a third at the same time. It covers one out of six equal parts of the bar. one half times one third equals one sixth

This is why multiplying fractions means taking one fraction of another.

Note
Multiplying fractions

To multiply two fractions together:

Multiply the numerators together and write this as the new numerator.

Multiply the denominators together and write this as the new denominator.

Simplify the result, if possible.

Unlike with addition or subtraction, you do not need to find a common denominator when multiplying fractions. Each fraction acts as its own scaling; for instance, multiplying by one half means “take one half of”, and multiplying by one third means “take one third of”. If both fractions are less than 1, each denominator divides the quantity again, so the number gets smaller.

Note
Example 4

Calculate three fourths times eight ninths.

Multiply the numerators and the denominators separately, and simplify the result. three fourths times eight ninths equals the fraction with numerator 3 times 8 and denominator 4 times 9 equals 24 over 36 equals two thirds

In this example, the numerators and the denominators of the fraction 24 over 36 are small enough to make simplifying manageable. When the numbers are larger, multiplying first can create very large numbers on the numerator and the denominator.

A more reliable method is to simplify before multiplying. You can do this by cancelling any common factors between any numerator and any denominator in the problem.

Note
Example 5

Calculate 14 over 25 times 15 over 21.

The previous method involved multiplying first and then simplifying. 14 over 25 times 15 over 21 equals the fraction with numerator 14 times 15 and denominator 25 times 21 equals 210 over 525

This is a large fraction which takes a while to simplify. You would need to find the highest common factor of these two numbers (which is 105) or simplify in multiple steps (divide by 5, then 7, then 3). Here, 210 over 525 equals the fraction with numerator 210 divided by 105 and denominator 525 divided by 105 equals two fifths and this is your final answers.

There is a more reliable method to perform this multiplication by looking for common factors in both numerators and denominators.

Note
Example 6

Calculate 14 over 25 times 15 over 21.

Here, you can see

The numerator 14 and the denominator 21 share a common factor of 7.

The numerator 15 and the denominator 25 share a common factor of 5.

You can show this cancelling process directly on the fractions. First, divide 14 and 21 by their common factor of 7 to get 2 and 3, respectively. Next, divide 15 and 25 by their common factor of 5 to get 3 and 5, respectively.

The original problem has now become: two fifths times three thirds

Notice that 3 is also a common factor in a numerator and denominator so the final simplified multiplication problem is: two fifths times one oneth

You can now multiply the simplified numerators together and the simplified denominators together, as before two fifths times one oneth equals the fraction with numerator 2 times 1 and denominator 5 times 1 equals two fifths

This method gives the final simplified answer directly and avoids large calculations.

Warning

This method of cancelling factors only works for multiplication. You cannot cancel factors across numerators and denominators when adding or subtracting fractions.

In the interactive figure below, you can use the sliders to set the numerators and denominators for the two fractions that are being multiplied together. The grid visually displays the first fraction as blue columns and the second fraction as red rows. The overlapping pink area represents the result or “fraction of a fraction”.

This demonstrates how multiplying fractions works. The grid is divided into Denominator cap A times Denominator cap B total rectangles, and the overlapping area covers Numerator cap A times Numerator cap B of those rectangles. Hover over the non-overlapping blue or red areas to see each fraction individually. The complete calculation, including any simplification, is shown in the box at the bottom.

If you want to multiply a fraction by a whole number, you can rewrite the whole number as an improper fraction with denominator 1, then multiply. For example, three fifths times 6 equals three fifths times six oneths equals the fraction with numerator 3 times 6 and denominator 5 times 1 equals eighteen fifths equals 3 and three fifths

Dividing fractions

Whenever you are dividing one fraction by another fraction, you are asking yourself the question “How many times does this fraction fit into the other?”

The process for dividing fractions is similar to the process for multiplying fractions, with one key change: dividing by a fraction is the same as multiplying by the reciprocal of that fraction.

Note
Reciprocal of a fraction

The reciprocal of a fraction is what you get by swapping its numerator and denominator.

For example, the reciprocal of five sevenths is seven fifths.

So, instead of working directly with division, you can rewrite the question as a multiplication problem, which you know how to do.

Imagine you have two thirds of a chocolate bar, and you want to know how many pieces of size five sevenths fit inside that amount. Instead of trying to figure out how many times five sevenths fits into two thirds, you can flip five sevenths to get its reciprocal seven fifths and then turn the division into multiplication. two thirds divided by five sevenths equals two thirds times seven fifths

Note
Dividing fractions

To divide fractions, you can follow the keep, change, flip method:

Keep the first fraction the same.

Change division to multiplication.

Flip the second fraction (take its reciprocal).

This turns the division problem into a multiplication problem, which you know how to do!

Note
Example 7

Calculate three fourths divided by one eighth.

To do this, you could follow the keep, change, flip method.

Keep the first fraction as three fourths, change the division sign to a multiplication sign, and flip the second fraction so that one eighth becomes eight oneths. Now multiply the fractions together. three fourths divided by one eighth equals three fourths times eight oneths equals three oneths times two oneths equals the fraction with numerator 3 times 2 and denominator 1 times 1 equals six oneths equals 6

As seen in the multiplying fractions section, when you multiply two fractions that are both less than 1, the result gets smaller because you are taking a fraction of a fraction. Dividing by fractions works differently. When you divide by a fraction, you are asking how many of those smaller pieces fit into what you already have. This means that the answer could actually be larger than the number you started with.

Arithmetic with mixed numbers

When doing arithmetic on mixed numbers, the safest way to do this is to convert to improper fractions (as seen in Guide: Introduction to fractions and then use the processes above.

Note
Example 8

Calculate 1 and two thirds plus four fifths.

Here, you should first convert the mixed number 1 and two thirds into an improper fraction to get 1 and two thirds equals five thirds which turns into the sum five thirds plus four fifths You can notice that they have different denominators, and so you need to find a common denominator. Since 3 times 5 equals 15, and 15 is not too big, this will do. (You can work this out as the lowest common multiple of 3 and 5 as well.) So

2 lines Line 1: blank five thirds equals sign with times 5 over it 25 over 15 Line 2: blank four fifths equals sign with times 3 over it 12 over 15

This means that

1 lines Line 1: 1 and two thirds plus four fifths equals five thirds plus four fifths equals 25 over 15 plus 12 over 15 equals 37 over 15

and if you want to, you can write this final answer as the mixed number 2 and 7 over 15.

Quick check problems

Work out each of the following. If you answer is a whole number, write that whole number. If your answer is a fraction, write your answer as a divided by b where a divided by b is the fraction in its simplest form.

one fifth plus two fifths equals

(Empty output) What is the lowest common multiple of 6 and 10?

one half plus one fourth equals

one third minus one half equals

one half times three fourths equals

one half divided by one fourth equals

Further reading

For more questions on the subject, please go to Questions: Arithmetic on numerical fractions.

To learn about fractions which include algebraic terms, please see Guide: Introduction to algebraic fractions.