Introduction to differentiation and the derivative

CALCULUS

AUTHOR

Tom Coleman

SUMMARY
The idea of differentiation is everywhere in modern mathematics and in the sciences as it is related to the rate of change of an object or process. In this guide, the idea of differentiation and the derivative is introduced from first principles, its role in explaining the behaviour of functions is explained, and derivatives of common functions are introduced and used.

Before reading this guide, it is recommended that you read [Guide: Properties of functions], Guide: Laws of indices, Guide: Logarithms, and [Guide: Tangents].

What is differentiation?

Functions can be used to model many real-life processes; such as the speed of a car, the performance of a stock market over time, and the growth rate of animal populations. You can use mathematical tools examined in the first three chapters to solve some of these problems (as well as a host of others).

Sometimes it is necessary to examine the rate of change of a particular process or phenomenon. For instance, the rate of change of the speed of a car is acceleration. Studying different rates of change of such a real life problem is often useful; for instance, by looking at acceleration of a car over time, you can determine how far the car goes. Rates of change are common in studying other, real-life processes, such as: the change in value of a company in a stock exchange in economics, the change in population of a species of animal in biology, or the rate of decay of radioactive material in chemistry.

The idea of investigating the rate of change of functions and their associated applications is known as differential calculus. The process of differentiation allows you to examine these properties of rates of change of functions. Importantly, this process is general, allowing you to investigate the rate of change of a function at any point. Differentiating a function y equals f of x gives its derivative, which is written as normal d y over normal d x or f prime of x.

This guide will look at the idea of differentiation; where it comes from, how it can be used, and how you can apply its techniques to functions that you may be familiar with.

Gradients of a graph

The rate of change of a straight line y equals m x plus c is its gradient m, and this doesn’t change wherever you are on the line. However, the rate of change of a function like f of x equals x squared divided by 2 plus 1 is dependent on what point you are at — when x is small, the rate of change is correspondingly small; when x is large, the rate of change is larger. You can see this in the variable ‘steepness’ of the curve in the figure below.

The idea of examining the rate of change of a function is to look at the gradients of straight lines, with endpoints as values on the graph, that approximate the function. The smaller the straight line is, the better the approximation. So let h be some small real number. Then the line with endpoints f of open paren x plus h close paren and f of x has vertical change f of open paren x plus h close paren minus f of x, and horizontal change open paren x plus h close paren minus x equals h. Therefore, the gradient of this line is the fraction with numerator f of open paren x plus h close paren minus f of x and denominator h period

Here’s an interactive example of an approximation of the gradient of a function f of x. You can notice that as h gets smaller, then the gradient of the line segment on the graph gets closer to the gradient of the red line, providing a better approximation of the steepness of f of x at a point.

The problem is when h tends towards 0, then f of open paren x plus h close paren and f of x get closer and closer to one another, and the length of the line gets smaller and smaller. What use is there measuring the gradient of a line if the line disappears? The idea is to look at a parallel line, which has the same gradient.

Here, this convenient parallel line is the tangent of f of x at x; this is the straight line touching the curve at the point open paren x comma f of x close paren, but does not intersect it at that point (see [Guide: Tangents]). Therefore, you can say that the gradient of the tangent to the curve at the point x is lim over h right arrow 0 of the fraction with numerator f of open paren x plus h close paren minus f of x and denominator h and this consideration defines the derivative of a function.

Derivatives and differentiation

Following the investigation in the previous section, the derivative of a function can now be defined.

Definition of the derivative f prime of x

The derivative of f of x with respect to x is defined to be the function f prime of x equals lim over h right arrow 0 of the fraction with numerator f of open paren x plus h close paren minus f of x and denominator h The derivative of f of x with respect to x is a function in its own right. The value of the derivative f prime of x at the point x equals a, defined by f prime of a equals lim over h right arrow 0 of the fraction with numerator f of open paren a plus h close paren minus f of a and denominator h is the gradient of the tangent to f of x at the point a.

If this limit exists, then f of x is differentiable at x equals a. If f of x is differentiable at every point of its domain, then it is a differentiable function. The process of finding f prime of x given a function f of x is called differentiating with respect to x.

The function f of x is often defined in terms of a second variable y. If a function is written y equals f of x, then there is alternative notation for writing the derivative with respect to x:

Definition of d y divided by d x

Let y equals f of x be a function of x. Then the derivative of y with respect to x can be written as normal d y over normal d x equals f prime of x

The derivative of y with respect to x at a point x equals a is written as normal d y over normal d x vertical bar sub x equals a equals f prime of a.

Warning

Although normal d y over normal d x looks like a fraction, it isn’t. However, sometimes it behaves like a fraction, and you can use this to remember certain results. However, this isn’t an excuse to treat it as a fraction in standard mathematical work.

This notation was used by Leibniz to represent the derivative of a function y equals f of x. It’s useful because it codifies the derivative as a rate of change (ratio of change in y to change in x) as well as explicitly naming the variable that you are differentiating with respect to. (This will be extremely useful in [Guide: Introduction to partial differentiation].) However, it’s not so useful for expressing the value of the derivative at a particular point x equals a; for instance f prime of a compared to normal d y over normal d x vertical bar sub x equals a period The important thing to consider is this:

Tip

As both notations f prime of x and normal d f over normal d x have their advantages over the other, it’s important to be able to use both sets of notation interchangeably.

Finally, the actual value of the derivative f prime of x of a function f of x at a point x equals a is very important, because it tells you about the behaviour of the function at that point. This is referred to as the rate of change of f of x at x equals a, and is equal to the gradient of the tangent to f of x at the point open paren a comma f of a close paren. The way in which the function changes at a point x equals a depends on the value of f prime of a:

If f prime of a is greater than 0, then the function f of x is increasing at x equals a;

If f prime of a is less than 0, then the function f of x is decreasing at x equals a;

If f prime of a equals 0, then the function f of x is stationary at x equals a. The point x equals a is called a stationary point of the function f of x.

Differentiating well-known functions

You can use the limit definition of the derivative to show that the following key functions have the following derivatives:

List of derivatives

For any number a, the derivative of the constant function f of x equals a is f prime of x equals 0.

For any number n is not equal to 0, the derivative of any function f of x equals x to the n-th power is f prime of x equals n x raised to the n minus 1 power. This includes not only whole numbers, but also fractions and other non-zero real numbers.

The derivative of the exponential function f of x equals e to the x-th power is f prime of x equals e to the x-th power.

The derivative of the sine function f of x equals sine x is f prime of x equals cosine x, and the derivative of the cosine function g of x equals cosine x is g prime of x equals negative sine x. (Notice the minus sign here!)

The derivative of the natural logarithm function f of x equals l n of x is f prime of x equals 1 over x.

Important

If you are going to use differentiation in your work/life, you should remember these results.

Most of these results are explained in Proof sheet: Derivatives of functions from first principles.

From here, you can combine two functions into one and differentiate. The following results say this.

Rules for differentiation

Let f of x and g of x be differentiable functions, and c be a non-zero real number. Then:

(sum rule) The derivative of two functions f of x and g of x added together is the same as their derivatives f prime of x and g prime of x added together; that is, normal d over normal d x times open paren f plus g close paren equals normal d f over normal d x plus normal d g over normal d x

(difference rule) The derivative of one function g of x subtracted from another f of x is the same as the derivative g prime of x subtracted from the derivative of f prime of x; that is normal d over normal d x times open paren f minus g close paren equals normal d f over normal d x minus normal d g over normal d x

(scaling rule) The derivative of a function f of x multiplied by a real number c is the same as the derivative f prime of x multiplied by c; that is normal d over normal d x times open paren c f of x close paren equals c normal d f over normal d x

Important

These differentiation rules do not tell you how to differentiate all possible combinations of functions. For instance:

you need the product rule to differentiate the product f of x g of x of two functions

you need the quotient rule (and g of x is not equal to 0) to differentiate the quotient f of x divided by g of x of two functions

you need the chain rule to differentiate the composition f of g of x of two functions

These techniques are important enough to merit their own guides. For more about these, see [Guide: The product rule], [Guide: The quotient rule], [Guide: The chain rule]. For more on where these results come from, see [Proof sheet: Rules of differentiation.]

Specifically, using the scaling and chain rule can be used to show the following results, which are incredibly useful for any work involving differentiation.

Generalized list of derivatives

Let a comma b comma n be real numbers where n is not equal to 0. Then:

The derivative of a straight line f of x equals a x plus b is f prime of x equals a.

The derivative of a power f of x equals a x to the n-th power is f prime of x equals a n x raised to the n minus 1 power.

The derivative of the exponential function f of x equals a e raised to the b x power is f prime of x equals a b e raised to the b x power.

The derivative of the sine function f of x equals a sine b x is f prime of x equals a b cosine b x, and the derivative of the cosine function g of x equals a cosine b x is g prime of x equals negative a b sine b x. (Notice the minus sign here!)

The derivative of the natural logarithm function f of x equals a l n b x is f prime of x equals a over x.

So if there is a constant inside the argument of the function, you should multiply by that constant when you differentiate.

Examples

Here’s some examples of differentiation in action.

Example 1

Find the derivative of the function f of x equals the fraction with numerator x squared and denominator 2 plus 1.

Here, you can use the sum and scaling rules to differentiate this function. Using the sum rule, you can see that normal d over normal d x times open paren the fraction with numerator x squared and denominator 2 plus 1 close paren equals normal d over normal d x times open paren the fraction with numerator x squared and denominator 2 close paren plus normal d over normal d x times 1 Now, using the scaling rule on the first of these terms, you can get normal d over normal d x times open paren the fraction with numerator x squared and denominator 2 close paren plus normal d over normal d x times 1 equals one half times normal d over normal d x times open paren x squared close paren plus normal d over normal d x times 1

Now you can use the derivatives of common functions. The function x squared is of the form x to the n-th power, so the derivative of x squared is 2 x raised to the 2 minus 1 power equals 2 x to the first power equals 2 x. The function 1 is a constant, so the derivative of 1 is 0. Putting these results in gives one half times normal d over normal d x times open paren x squared close paren plus normal d over normal d x times 1 equals one half times 2 x plus 0 Simplifying gives the answer: normal d over normal d x times open paren the fraction with numerator x squared and denominator 2 plus 1 close paren equals x and so the derivative of f of x equals x squared divided by 2 plus 1 is equal to f prime of x equals x.

You can then say that this function f of x equals x squared divided by 2 plus 1 is increasing if x is greater than 0, decreasing if x is less than 0, and is stationary exactly when x equals 0.

You do not need to be so meticulous in your general practice when differentiating. You can differentiate functions without stating what rules you are using.

Example 2

Find the derivative of the function f of x equals 4 e raised to the 3 x power minus the square root of x.

Of these two terms, 4 e raised to the 3 x power looks like a common function, but you have not seen how to differentiate the square root of x yet. In fact, this is another case of x to the n-th power; in this case, n equals 1 divided by 2. (See Guide: Laws of indices for why this is.)

You can then rewrite the function as f of x equals 4 e raised to the 3 x power minus x raised to the 1 divided by 2 power which you can then apply your knowledge of differentiation to. Using the results above, the derivative of 4 e raised to the 3 x power is 4 times 3 times e raised to the 3 x power equals 12 e raised to the 3 x power. The derivative of x raised to the 1 divided by 2 power is one half times x raised to the 1 divided by 2 minus 1 power equals the fraction with numerator x raised to the negative 1 divided by 2 power and denominator 2. Therefore, the derivative of 4 e raised to the 3 x power minus the square root of x is f prime of x equals 12 e raised to the 3 x power minus the fraction with numerator x raised to the negative 1 divided by 2 power and denominator 2

You could turn x raised to the negative 1 divided by 2 power into 1 divided by the square root of x; however, you may be asked to differentiate this function again (particularly if you are looking into behaviour of a function), and often it is best to leave the power as a real number rather than using the square root notation.

As a rule of thumb, you should always write an nth root using a fractional power instead. Here’s another example of where you should write a term involving a power of x:

Example 3

Find the derivative of the function f of x equals the fraction with numerator 1 and denominator x to the fourth power plus 4 cosine x minus sine 4 x.

Again, the cosine and sine terms are manageable from the derivative above, it is only the 1 divided by x to the fourth power term that needs a little thought. In fact, this is yet another case of x to the n-th power; this time when n equals negative 4. (See Guide: Laws of indices for why this is.)

You can then rewrite the function as f of x equals x to the negative 4 power plus 4 sine x minus cosine 4 x and use the familiar rules of differentiation above. Using the results above with n equals negative 4, the derivative of x to the negative 4 power is negative 4 x raised to the negative 4 minus 1 power equals negative 4 x to the negative 5 power. The derivative of 4 sine x is 4 times cosine x equals 4 cosine x. The derivative of cosine 4 x is negative 4 sine 4 x. Taking care of your signs you can write the derivative of the fraction with numerator 1 and denominator x to the fourth power plus 4 cosine x minus sine 4 x as f prime of x equals negative 4 x to the negative 5 power plus 4 cosine x minus open paren negative 4 sine 4 x close paren equals negative 4 x to the negative 5 power plus 4 cosine x plus 4 sine 4 x period

Example 4

Determine the behaviour of the function f of x equals 2 l n 3 x minus x when x equals 1.

Here, you will first need to differentiate the function f of x to find f prime of x. Then, you will need to evaluate the derivative f prime of x when x equals 1 to see how the function behaves.

Using your rules of differentiation as you found above, you can say that the derivative of 2 l n 3 x is 2 divided by x, and the derivative of x is 1. Therefore, the derivative of the function f of x equals 2 l n 3 x minus x is f prime of x equals 2 over x minus 1 period You can evaluate the derivative f prime of x at x equals 1 to get f prime of 1 equals two oneths minus 1 equals 2 minus 1 equals 1 and so the derivative is positive at x equals 1. This implies that the function f of x equals 2 l n 3 x minus x is increasing at the point x equals 1.

It also means that the gradient of the tangent to the function f of x at the point open paren 1 comma 2 l n of 3 minus 1 close paren is 1. You can see this in the figure below.

Summary

Here’s a table of derivatives that you should remember going into any further reading on differentiation. Here, a comma b comma c comma n are any real numbers.

Quick check problems

Answer the following questions true or false:

The derivative of a function at x equals a is equal to the gradient of the tangent to f of x at x equals a. Answer: 
TRUE
FALSE
 .

If f prime of a is less than 0, then the function is increasing at x equals a. Answer: 
TRUE
FALSE
 .

If f of x equals c, then the derivative f prime of x equals c minus 1. Answer: 
TRUE
FALSE
 .

The derivative of f of x equals cosine x is f prime of x equals negative sine x. Answer: 
TRUE
FALSE
 .

The derivative of f of x equals 1 over x is f prime of x equals l n of x. Answer: 
TRUE
FALSE
 .

The power of x in the derivative of f of x equals the fraction with numerator 1 and denominator the square root of x is negative 3 divided by 2. Answer: 
TRUE
FALSE
 .

Fill in the gaps of the statements below.

If f of x equals 3 x to the seventh power minus 14 x, then f prime of x equals  x to the sixth power minus  .

If f of x equals negative 4 cosine 3 x, then f prime of x equals  sine open paren  close paren.

If f of x equals negative 15 sine x plus e raised to the 8 x power, then f prime of x equals  cosine open paren  close paren plus  e raised to the 8 x power.

Further reading

For more questions on the subject, please go to Questions: Introduction to differentiation and the derivative.

For more about techniques of differentiation, please see [Guide: The product rule], [Guide: The quotient rule], and [Guide: The chain rule].

For more about where the derivatives in the above table come from, please see Proof sheet: Derivatives of functions from first principles and [Proof sheet: Derivatives of other common functions]. For more about why the rules of differentiation are true, please see [Proof sheet: Rules of differentiation].

Version history