Completing the square

ALGEBRA

SOLVING EQUATIONS

KEY SKILLS

AUTHOR

Tom Coleman

SUMMARY
Completing the square is an important technique to learn for dealing with quadratic expressions in a variety of places. It can help you solve quadratic equations, accurately sketch graphs of conic sections, and is widely used in integral calculus.

Before reading this guide, it is recommended that you read Guide: Introduction to quadratic equations. Optionally, you may also find it useful to read Guide: Factorization for the purposes of checking your answers, Guide: Laws of indices for algebraic manipulation, Guide: Introduction to rearranging equations for rearranging completed squares to solve quadratics and Guide: Introduction to complex numbers for dealing with square roots of negative numbers.

What is completing the square?

As you have seen in Guide: Introduction to quadratic equations, quadratic expressions are incredibly important in mathematics, and having a variety of techniques of dealing with them will be important tools in your future work.

One of these techniques is called completing the square, which takes a quadratic expression like a x squared plus b x plus c and expresses it in the form a times open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q; essentially, completing the square is like ‘factorization with a remainder’. Completing the square is a useful tool in many areas of mathematics, such as geometry (particularly in the theory of conic sections), integral calculus, and solving quadratic equations. Not only is it useful in these areas, it also gives you an opportunity to practise your skills involving algebraic manipulation and factorization.

This guide will focus on completing the square for quadratic expressions of the form a x squared plus b x plus c, both where a equals 1 and where a is not equal to 1.

Expressions of the form x squared plus b x plus c

The idea is to turn a quadratic expression like x squared plus b x plus c into one that looks like open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q where b comma c comma p comma q are numbers. The best way to see how this works is via an example, which relies on expanding brackets (see [Guide: Expanding brackets] for more).

Note
Example 1

Suppose you want to complete the square of a quadratic expression like x squared plus 4 x plus 9. The aim of completing the square is to find numbers p comma q such that open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q equals x squared plus 4 x plus 9 period Expanding the brackets on the left-hand side of this equation gives x squared plus 2 p x plus p squared plus q equals x squared plus 4 x plus 9 period These two expressions are equal if and only if the coefficients match. Comparing the coefficients for the x terms on both sides gives 2 p equals 4 and so p equals 2. With this knowledge, you can then compare the 9 with the p squared plus q term to get 4 plus q equals 9 and so q equals 5. You can then write that x squared plus 4 x plus 9 equals open paren x plus 2 close paren squared plus 5 and you have completed the square.

To check your answer, you can expand the brackets of the completed square:

2 lines Line 1: open paren x plus 2 close paren squared plus 5 equals x squared plus 4 x plus 4 plus 5 Line 2: blank equals x squared plus 4 x plus 9

which is the original expression.

There is a clickable YouTube video at this point in the guide, explaining Example 1.

You can investigate what happens in the completing the square for x squared plus b x plus c in this interactive figure, which works for whole numbered values of b which are positive and even. Put your choice of b and c into the boxes given, and click through the steps to see how ‘completing the square’ gets its name!

There is an interactive html figure at this point in the guide. 

You can notice three things about Example 1:

If you are trying to write x squared plus b x plus c in the form open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q, then the value of p is going to be half that of b, so p equals b divided by 2.

Whether or not q is positive or negative depends on the value of c. If c is greater than p squared, then q is positive; if c is less than p squared, then q is negative.

This gives a method for working out the completed square of any expression of the form x squared plus b x plus c. See below for such a method.

Note
Method 1 (x squared plus b x plus c)

Suppose you’re given an expression like x squared plus b x plus c and you want to write it in the form open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q. Here’s how to complete the square:

First, write p equals b divided by 2. This gives you p.

Work out p squared, and solve the equation p squared plus q equals c for q. This gives you q.

Then the expression open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q is equal to x squared plus b x plus c, and you have completed the square.

You can use this method to complete the square in the examples that follow.

Note
Example 2

Suppose you would like to complete the square of the expression x squared plus 12 x plus 20. Here, you can identify the expression as in the form x squared plus b x plus c with b equals 12 and c equals 20. Now, you can follow the steps in Method 1.

Here, p equals b divided by 2 equals 12 divided by 2 equals 6.

Working out p squared gives 6 squared equals 36. Solving p squared plus q equals c gives q, and so here 36 plus q equals 20. It follows that q equals negative 16.

You can then say that open paren x plus 6 close paren squared minus 16 equals x squared plus 12 x plus 20. Expanding the brackets to check your answer gives 1 lines Line 1: open paren x plus 6 close paren squared minus 16 equals x squared plus 12 x plus 36 minus 16 equals x squared plus 12 x plus 20 period

You can see in this example that q may be negative. The next example demonstrates a case where p is negative.

Note
Example 3

Suppose you would like to complete the square of the expression y squared minus 10 y plus 41. Once again, you can identify the expression as in the form y squared plus b y plus c with b equals negative 10 and c equals 41. Now, you can follow the steps in Method 1.

Here, p equals b divided by 2 equals negative 10 divided by 2 equals negative 5.

Working out p squared gives open paren negative 5 close paren squared equals 25. Solving p squared plus q equals c gives q, and so here 25 plus q equals 41. It follows that q equals 16.

You can then say that open paren y minus 5 close paren squared plus 16 equals y squared minus 10 y plus 41. Expanding the brackets to check your answer gives 1 lines Line 1: open paren y minus 5 close paren squared plus 16 equals y squared minus 10 y plus 25 plus 16 equals y squared minus 10 y plus 41 period

The next example contains a case where b is odd, and so p will not be a whole number.

Note
Example 4

You are given the quadratic expression x squared plus 3 x minus 1, and you would like to complete the square. Identifying the expression as in the form x squared plus b x plus c with b equals 3 and c equals negative 1, you can follow the steps in Method 1.

Here, p equals b divided by 2 equals 3 divided by 2.

Working out p squared gives open paren 3 divided by 2 close paren squared equals 9 divided by 4. Solving p squared plus q equals c gives q, and so here nine fourths plus q equals negative 1 period Since negative 1 equals negative 4 divided by 4, you can work out that q equals negative 13 divided by 4.

You can then say that open paren x plus three halves close paren squared minus thirteen fourths is the completed square of x squared plus 3 x minus 1.

Expanding the brackets to check your answer gives 2 lines Line 1: open paren x plus three halves close paren squared minus thirteen fourths equals x squared plus 3 x plus nine fourths minus thirteen fourths Line 2: blank equals x squared plus 3 x minus four fourths equals x squared plus 3 x minus 1 period

Here’s a final example of an important quadratic expression previously seen in Guide: Using the quadratic formula.

Note
Example 5

You are given the quadratic expression m squared minus m minus 1, and you would like to complete the square. Identifying the expression as in the form m squared plus b m plus c with b equals negative 1 and c equals negative 1, you can follow the steps in Method 1.

Here, p equals negative 1 divided by 2.

Working out p squared gives open paren negative 1 divided by 2 close paren squared equals 1 divided by 4. Solving p squared plus q equals c gives q, and so here one fourth plus q equals negative 1 period Since negative 1 equals negative 4 divided by 4, you can work out that q equals negative 5 divided by 4.

You can then say that open paren m minus one half close paren squared minus five fourths is the completed square of m squared minus m minus 1.

Expanding the brackets to check your answer gives 2 lines Line 1: open paren m minus one half close paren squared minus five fourths equals m squared minus m plus one fourth minus five fourths Line 2: blank equals m squared minus m minus four fourths equals m squared minus m minus 1 period

Expressions of the form a x squared plus b x plus c

Unfortunately, not every quadratic expression has the coefficient of the x squared term equal to 1. It is often the case that that a is not equal to 1 in the quadratic expression a x squared plus b x plus c. So how do you deal with this?

The idea is to factorize the quadratic expression, taking out the constant a (which is necessarily non-zero in a quadratic expression). Doing this gives a x squared plus b x plus c equals a times open paren x squared plus b over a x plus c over a close paren You can then notice that the term inside the brackets is of the form x squared plus r x plus s, where r comma s are numbers; but you can complete the square of these kinds of expressions already!

So, to complete the square of a x squared plus b x plus c into a form of a times open paren x plus p close paren squared plus t, you can follow this method:

Note
Method 2 (a x squared plus b x plus c)

Suppose you’re given an expression like a x squared plus b x plus c and you want to write it in the form a times open paren x plus p close paren squared plus t. Here’s how to complete the square:

First of all, take out a factor of a to get a times open paren x squared plus r x plus s close paren, where r equals b divided by a and s equals c divided by a.

Complete the square on x squared plus r x plus s to get open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q.

The expression a times open paren open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q close paren is equal to a x squared plus b x plus c. Multiplying out the brackets shows that a times open paren x plus p close paren squared plus a q equals a x squared plus b x plus c.

Tip

There is a way of completing the square for a x squared plus b x plus c in the form open paren d x plus e close paren squared plus f. The formula is given here: a x squared plus b x plus c equals open paren x the square root of a plus b over 2 the square root of a close paren squared plus open paren c minus the fraction with numerator b squared and denominator 4 a close paren This works well if a is a perfect square; see Example 8 for more.

Do not try and remember this formula! It is much better to reinforce the methods given in this guide rather than input numbers into this formula.

Note
Example 6

Suppose you would like to complete the square of the expression 2 x squared plus 12 x plus 24. Here, you can identify the expression as in the form a x squared plus b x plus c with a equals 2, b equals 12 and c equals 24. Now, you can follow the steps in Method 1.

Taking out a factor of a equals 2 gives the expression as 2 x squared plus 12 x plus 24 equals 2 times open paren x squared plus 6 x plus 12 close paren You can now notice the part inside the brackets is of the form x squared plus r x plus s with r equals 6 and s equals 12.

Now, complete the square on x squared plus 6 x plus 12. Here p equals 6 divided by 2 equals 3. Working out p squared gives 3 squared equals 9. Solving p squared plus q equals s gives q, and so here 9 plus q equals 12. It follows that q equals 3.

This means that 2 x squared plus 12 x plus 24 equals 2 times open paren open paren x plus 3 close paren squared plus 3 close paren and so taking out the last term in brackets gives 2 x squared plus 12 x plus 24 equals 2 times open paren x plus 3 close paren squared plus 6 This is your final answer.

Once again, you can expand the brackets to check your answer: 2 lines Line 1: 2 times open paren x plus 3 close paren squared plus 6 equals 2 times open paren x squared plus 6 x plus 9 close paren plus 6 Line 2: blank equals 2 x squared plus 12 x plus 18 plus 6 equals 2 x squared plus 12 x plus 24

Note
Example 7

Suppose you would like to complete the square of the expression 4 y squared plus 12 y minus 4. You can identify the expression as in the form a y squared plus b y plus c with a equals 4, b equals 12 and c equals negative 4.

Taking out a factor of a equals 4 gives the expression as 4 y squared plus 12 y minus 4 equals 4 times open paren y squared plus 3 y minus 1 close paren You can now notice the part inside the brackets is of the form y squared plus r y plus s with r equals 3 and s equals negative 1.

Now, complete the square on y squared plus 3 y minus 1. You can notice that you have already done this in Example 4 with x as the variable. So here y squared plus 3 y minus 1 equals open paren y plus three halves close paren squared minus thirteen fourths period

This means that 4 y squared plus 12 y minus 4 equals 4 times open paren open paren y plus three halves close paren squared minus thirteen fourths close paren and so taking out the last term in brackets gives 4 y squared plus 12 y minus 4 equals 4 times open paren y plus three halves close paren squared minus 4 times thirteen fourths equals 4 times open paren y plus three halves close paren squared minus 13 period

Once again, you can expand the brackets to check your answer: 2 lines Line 1: 4 times open paren y plus three halves close paren squared minus 13 equals 4 times open paren y squared plus 3 y plus nine fourths close paren minus 13 Line 2: blank equals 4 y squared plus 12 y plus 9 minus 13 equals 4 y squared plus 12 y minus 4

You can simplify this example even further. You could notice here that a equals 4 is a square number; specifically, 2 times 2. By writing 4 equals 2 times 2, you can use the laws of indices (see Guide: Laws of indices) to say that 1 lines Line 1: 4 times open paren y plus three halves close paren squared equals 2 squared times open paren y plus three halves close paren squared equals open paren 2 times open paren y plus three halves close paren close paren squared equals open paren 2 y plus 3 close paren squared and so 4 y squared plus 12 y minus 4 equals open paren 2 y plus 3 close paren squared minus 13. This technique is particularly useful if a is the square of an integer; less useful if it is not!

The final example in this section deals with some slightly odder looking numbers. Although the numbers will not be as nice as the previous examples, if you follow the process carefully then uglier numbers will not matter!

Note
Example 8

Suppose you would like to complete the square of the expression 3 m squared minus 2 m minus 1. You can identify the expression as in the form a m squared plus b m plus c with a equals 3, b equals negative 2 and c equals negative 1.

Taking out a factor of a equals 3 gives the expression as 3 m squared minus 2 m minus 1 equals 3 times open paren m squared minus two thirds m minus one third close paren You can now notice the part inside the brackets is of the form m squared plus r m plus s with r equals negative 2 divided by 3 and s equals negative 1 divided by 3.

Now, complete the square on m squared minus two thirds m minus one third. Here p equals open paren negative 2 divided by 3 close paren divided by 2 equals negative 1 divided by 3. Working out p squared gives open paren negative 1 divided by 3 close paren squared equals 1 divided by 9. Solving p squared plus q equals s gives q, and so here one ninth plus q equals negative one third It follows that q equals negative 4 divided by 9.

This means that 3 m squared minus 2 m minus 1 equals 3 times open paren open paren m minus one third close paren squared minus four ninths close paren and so taking out the last term in brackets gives 3 m squared minus 2 m minus 1 equals 3 times open paren m minus one third close paren squared minus 3 times four ninths equals 3 times open paren m minus one third close paren squared minus four thirds and this is your final answer.

Once again, you can expand the brackets to check your answer: 2 lines Line 1: 3 times open paren m minus one third close paren squared minus four thirds equals 3 times open paren m squared minus two thirds m plus one ninth close paren minus four thirds Line 2: blank equals 3 m squared minus 2 m plus one third minus four thirds equals 3 m squared minus 2 m minus 1

Solving quadratic equations

You can use what you have learned in this guide to solve quadratic equations of the form a x squared plus b x squared plus c equals 0. To do this, write the expression a x squared plus b x plus c as a completed square a times open paren x plus p close paren squared plus t, which is equal to 0. You can then rearrange the equation (see Guide: Introduction to rearranging equations for more) for x to work out the roots of the quadratic equation.

You may find that open paren x plus p close paren squared is equal to a negative number. You can use imaginary numbers to then solve the quadratic. See Guide: Introduction to complex numbers for more.

Note
Example 9

Suppose that you want to solve the quadratic equation x squared plus 12 x plus 20 equals 0. You completed the square of x squared plus 12 x plus 20 in Example 2, getting open paren x plus 6 close paren squared minus 16. So open paren x plus 6 close paren squared minus 16 equals 0; taking the 16 over and removing the square - taking care to include both the positive and negative roots of 16 - gives x plus 6 equals plus or minus 4 Therefore x equals negative 6 plus 4 equals negative 2 and x equals negative 6 minus 4 equals negative 10 are the two solutions of x squared plus 12 x plus 20 equals 0.

Note
Example 10

Suppose that you want to solve the quadratic equation y squared minus 10 y plus 41 equals 0. You completed the square of y squared minus 10 y plus 41 in Example 3, getting open paren y minus 5 close paren squared plus 16. So open paren y minus 5 close paren squared plus 16 equals 0; taking the 16 over gives open paren y minus 5 close paren squared equals negative 16. Using imaginary numbers (see Guide: Introduction to complex numbers) gives y minus 5 equals plus or minus 4 i Therefore y equals 5 plus 4 i and y equals 5 minus 4 i are the two complex solutions of y squared minus 10 y plus 41 equals 0.

Tip

You can complete the square on the general quadratic equation a x squared plus b x plus c equals 0 to get the quadratic formula, which gives solutions to any quadratic equation: see Guide: Using the quadratic formula for more, and Proof: The quadratic formula for how it is done.

Quick check problems

You are given four quadratic expressions below. Complete the square on each of them, by giving the constants. If your answer contains rational numbers, they should be written as fractions in their simplest form.

x squared minus 6 x equals open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q, where p equals  and q equals  .

x squared plus 8 x plus 1 equals open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q, where p equals  and q equals  .

x squared minus 5 x plus 8 equals open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q, where p equals  and q equals  .

2 x squared plus 8 x plus 15 equals a times open paren x plus p close paren squared plus q, where a equals  , p equals  and q equals  .

Further reading

For more questions on the subject, please go to Questions: Completing the square.