Introduction to confidence intervals

STATISTICS

AUTHOR

Millie Harris

SUMMARY
In statistics, to estimate an unknown parameter you can construct a confidence interval. This is the range of values you expect the true estimate to fall between if you were to repeat the study several times, with a certain level of confidence. This study guide introduces confidence intervals, confidence levels, and Z-values using the normal distribution.

Before reading this guide, it is recommended that you read Guide: Introduction to probability, Guide: Introduction to hypothesis testing, and Guide: Expected value, variance, standard deviation.

What is a confidence interval?

If you were conducting a study about a population of people and took several different samples of data, the sample means could be different for each sample. This makes estimating a population mean very difficult, as this variability affects your confidence that the sample is a true reflection of the population. A population mean is a fixed, unknown constant, and providing a confident estimate of this quantity that cannot be measured is one of the fundamental goals of statistics.

Initial example and set up

For instance, suppose that you were investigating average weights of chocolate bars. To do this, you had taken five samples of 30 chocolate bars from the massive conglomerate that is Cantor’s Confectionery, and worked out the average weights of each of these five samples:

Which of these is most reflective of the average weight of all of the chocolate bars produced by Cantor’s Confectionery? It’s impossible to say! So what you can do is consider a range of values. This range of values is called a confidence interval (CI), which is specified up to a confidence level (usually 95%, but this can vary). This range of values is centred at the sample mean x bar, and the bounds are given by the margin of error of your sample.

So each of these sample means will have a confidence interval associated to it, which is worked out using the data from the sample. You can then expand the above table to include the confidence intervals:

What does a confidence interval do? It should give you an idea of where the population mean should be. But given the various confidence intervals for the samples above, it’s not even clear where the population mean could be in any one of these. For instance, the confidence intervals for samples 1 and 2 do not meet; the population mean cannot be in both! This is because it is a fixed, unknown constant which does not vary.

It’s important to note that there is one confidence interval per sample of a population, and so if you take many samples (as has been done above), there are many confidence intervals that each estimate the population mean mu.

What a confidence interval tells you

Suppose that CL is the confidence level of your confidence interval. The general rule is that for CLpercent sign confidence intervals, then if you sample the population 100 times, then you can expect the population mean to lie within approximately CL many of the calculated CL percent sign CIs. You can replace CL with your given confidence level.

So you can say

It is likely (with CLpercent sign confidence) that the population mean is within this confidence interval.

because the population mean will be in approximately CL/100 of all CLpercent sign CI’s, but you cannot say

For this particular confidence interval, the probability that the population mean is within this confidence interval is CLpercent sign.

This is because the population mean mu is a fixed, unknown constant; and so the probability that it is in a given CLpercent sign CI is either 0 (it’s not in there) or 1 (it’s in there). Note the important difference between ‘probability’ and ‘confidence’!

The concept that does this is known as a credible interval; see [Guide: Credible intervals] for more.

What’s the point?

Confidence intervals are a vital tool used to measure uncertainties in everyday life. For example:

In politics, confidence intervals can be used to show the uncertainty in polling estimates.

In economics, confidence intervals can be used to show uncertainties in market trends and inflation.

In medicine and biology, confidence intervals can be used to show uncertainties around effects like mean weight loss, drug effectiveness, or survival rates.

In sports, confidence intervals can be used by coaches to measure the true performance levels of athletes.

In this guide

This guide will focus on how to construct and interpret confidence intervals using the normal distribution only. This will include looking at Z-values, two-tailed alpha values, and confidence levels. Then, the guide will discuss how to interpret what your confidence interval means.

For information on confidence intervals using other distributions see [Guide: More on confidence intervals].

Constructing confidence intervals

The normal distribution

The normal distribution, or sometimes called the “bell-curve” because of its shape, is a function used to model the probability of various naturally occurring measurements, such as the average height of trees, average ages of cats, average IQs of humans, and so on. You would expect these measurements to have lots of measurements close to the middle (the average) and fewer measurements towards the extremes (the tails).

More mathematically, the function is called a probability density function and it is written as N of open paren mu comma sigma squared close paren, which depends on two parameters: the mean mu and the standard deviation sigma. In situations where mu equals 0 and sigma equals 1, you have a standard normal distribution. For more on mu and sigma see Guide: Expected value, variance, standard deviation; for more on probability density functions, please see Guide: PMFs, PDFs, CDFs.

Note
Definition of a normally distributed random variable

For a population where mu is the population mean and sigma is the population standard deviation, a random variable X which is modelled by the normal distribution with these parameters is written as

X tilde N of open paren mu comma sigma squared close paren

which you can read as ‘X is normally distributed with parameters mu and sigma’.

So to use the mathematical tools associated with the normal distribution on a population, you need to have a fairly good idea of the two parameters, the mean mu (mu) and standard deviation sigma (sigma).

For more information on the normal distribution (such as what the function N of open paren mu comma sigma squared close paren actually is) see Factsheet: Normal distribution.

Tails

Because of the ‘bell-shape’ of the normal distribution, there are less values at each end. The extremes of the normal distribution are called the tails.

By drawing two vertical lines on the x-axis at the two points x equals x sub 0 and x equals negative x sub 0 (where x sub 0 is some number), and drawing upwards, you can define the area under the curve bounded to the right of x equals x sub 0 and to the left of x equals negative x sub 0. These areas at each end of the curve are often also called the tails of the distribution.

The total area of both tails combined is called alpha (alpha), and this is always a number between 0 and 1. Since the graph is symmetric and the lines are drawn at x equals x sub 0 and x equals negative x sub 0, the area of each tail is exactly alpha divided by 2.

To construct a confidence interval you need both tails, because you are looking at values both above and below the population mean, which is unknown. So you will construct what is called a two-tailed test.

Tip
Try!

Try different values of alpha and see how the size of the tails change.

Confidence level

Note
Definition of a confidence level

A confidence level (CL) suggests that if you were to repeat the sample and construction of a confidence interval 100 times, you would expect the true value of the population mean to fall within CL of the constructed confidence intervals. A CL is typically represented using a percentage.

For example, a 95 percent sign CL suggests that the true value of the population mean would fall within 95 out of 100 computed confidence intervals.

Important
alpha is 1 minus the CL

1 minus alpha is the confidence level. So you only need one of either alpha or the confidence level in order to generate a confidence interval.

Z value

The value of alpha (and/or the CL) is decided before constructing the confidence interval. Every value of alpha gives scores on the x axis which leaves that much alpha divided by 2 in each tail. Because of the symmetry of the normal distribution, these scores are plus and minus each other. This is called the Z-value.

Note
Definition of the Z value using the normal distribution

Using the normal distribution, a Z-value (sometimes called Z-score or standard score) is a known test statistic. It shows how many standard deviations above or below the mean an observed data point is.

For the purposes of constructing confidence intervals, the Z-value is written as Z sub alpha divided by 2. To work out Z sub alpha divided by 2, you need to specify the alpha (and/ or CL) value. You can then use the calculator below to find out Z sub alpha divided by 2.

Note
Example 1

Use the Z-value calculator below to find the Z values for alpha equals 0.1, alpha equals 0.05, and alpha equals 0.01. These values have been chosen as these are the most commonly used alpha values in statistics, with alpha equals 0.05 in particular giving 95 percent sign confidence intervals.

Using the normal distribution, alpha value (and/or the confidence level), and the corresponding Z value, you can then construct a confidence interval.

How do you construct a confidence interval?

Note
Definition of confidence interval using the normal distribution

The sample margin of error is defined to be the following:

M E equals Z sub alpha divided by 2 times the fraction with numerator s and denominator the square root of n

where

open paren Z sub alpha divided by 2 close paren is the Z-value corresponding to the chosen confidence level open paren 1 minus alpha close paren,

s is the sample standard deviation

n is the sample size.

The fraction s divided by the square root of n is often known as the standard error of the sample.

A CL% confidence interval (CI) is defined to be the interval open bracket x bar minus M E comma x bar plus M E close bracket where x bar is the sample mean and M E is the sample margin of error.

Here, x bar minus M E is called your lower bound and x bar plus M E is called your upper bound. The

Here’s a step-by-step guide to working out a confidence interval.

Tip
General steps for constructing a confidence interval using the normal distribution

Step 1: Write down everything you need to work out a confidence interval, which is

your sample size n

a sample mean x bar and sample standard deviation s

your alpha value alpha (or the confidence level (CL)) together with its corresponding Z value

Step 2: Use your alpha (or CL) and the Z-value calculator to find Z sub alpha divided by 2.

Step 3: Find the margin of error M E equals Z sub alpha divided by 2 times the fraction with numerator s and denominator the square root of n and then construct the confidence interval for this sample mean: open bracket x bar minus M E comma x bar plus M E close bracket

Step 4: Check your work! The average of your confidence interval should equal your sample mean.

Note
Example 2

Cantor’s Confectionery have purchased a new computer to help monitor the quality of their products. The computer allows them to input the mean and standard deviation of a sample of their best-selling products, and then put them into the following program.

What can you tell from this?

First of all, you can see that this is a normal distribution for the mean weight of one of Cantor’s Confectionery’s best selling products.

This takes an input of a sample mean and a sample standard deviation.

When different values for alpha are selected, the tails of the normal distribution change. This means that when constructing a confidence interval, the Z-values will be different depending on your confidence level.

By changing any of the parameters, the values of the confidence interval changes. This is because the value of the confidence intervals depend on all of these parameters.

Note
Example 3

Cantor’s Confectionery uses the normal distribution from Example 1 and the computer from Example 2 to construct a 95 percent sign confidence interval for the mean weight of their bags of sweets. They take a sample of 100 bags which has an average weight of 75 grams. The calculated standard deviation is 10 grams.

They ask you, an eminent and capable statistician, to check the results of their computation.

Step 1: What do you need?

The sample size is 100 bags of sweets, so n equals 100.

The average weight of the bags of sweets is 75 grams so x bar equals 75 g. The sample standard deviation of the sample is 10 grams so s equals 10 g.

The confidence level is 95 percent sign; so alpha equals 0.05 and alpha divided by 2 equals 0.025.

Step 2: Use the Z value calculator to identify Z sub 0.05 over 2 equals Z sub 0.025 equals 1.960.

Step 3: Construct the confidence interval. First, you’ll need to work out the margin of error; which since the sample standard deviation is in grams, and the Z-value and square root of sample size are unitless, should be expressed in grams. Here, M E equals Z sub 0.025 times the fraction with numerator s and denominator the square root of n equals 1.960 times the fraction with numerator 10 times g and denominator the square root of 100 equals 1.960 times 10 times g over 10 equals 1.960 g period

Then a 95% CI can be calculated:

95 percent sign CI equals open bracket open paren 75 minus 1.960 close paren times g comma open paren 75 plus 1.960 close paren times g close bracket equals open bracket 73.04 g comma 76.96 g close bracket

Step 4: Check your work. You know that the sample mean should be the exact centre of your confidence interval. Here

73.04 g plus 76.96 g equals 150 g and since

150 times g over 2 times g equals 75 g

you can see that the centre of the confidence interval is the sample mean x bar equals 75 g.

Note
Example 4

Using the sample mean and sample standard deviation from Example 3, you can ask the computer from Cantor’s Confectionery in Example 2 to work out a 90 percent sign confidence interval and 99 percent sign confidence interval. It outputs the following results:

2 lines Line 1: cap A 90 percent sign CI equals open bracket 73.36 g comma 76.64 g close bracket Line 2: cap A 99 percent sign CI equals open bracket 72.424 g comma 77.576 g close bracket

What does this suggest about the confidence levels and the corresponding confidence intervals?

For all three examples, the sample mean falls in the centre of the confidence interval. But, as the confidence level increases, so does the width of the confidence interval. This makes sense; if you want to be more confident as to where the population mean mu is, then you need to give a wider set of values.

This is also linked to the tails of the normal distribution. If you were to think about the tails of these normal graphs, as the CL increases the amount of area underneath each extreme decreases. This means you have more values in the middle of the graph, which is why you have more values in the confidence interval. For more on this, see [Guide: More on confidence intervals].

Here’s another example which shows that you do not need to follow the precise steps.

Note
Example 5

There is a new shop in town! Lovelace’s Lollies are claiming their products are better than Cantor’s Confectionery. They have employed you to construct some 95 percent sign confidence intervals for them.

They take a sample of 77 of their best selling boxes of lollies. The average weight of these boxes is 84 grams with a standard deviation of 9.5 grams. So

The sample size is n equals 77.

x bar equals 84 g is the sample mean, and s equals 9.5 g is the sample standard deviation.

It’s a 95 percent sign CI, and so Z sub 0.05 over 2 equals Z sub 0.025 equals 1.960.

So to construct the confidence interval you need to first compute the standard error:

M E equals Z sub alpha divided by 2 times the fraction with numerator s and denominator the square root of n equals 1.960 times the fraction with numerator 9.5 times g and denominator the square root of 77 equals 2.122 g to 3 dp period

Which means that the 95 percent sign CI for this sample is 95 percent sign CI equals open bracket open paren 84 minus 2.122 close paren times g comma open paren 84 plus 2.122 close paren times g close bracket equals open bracket 81.878 g comma 86.122 g close bracket

This completes your work for Lovelace’s Lollies.

Applications of confidence intervals

It’s really important to scrutinize any of your answers and check your understanding of the statistics you are presenting.

So in Examples 3 and 5, Cantor’s Confectionery and Lovelace’s Lollies have both constructed a 95 percent sign confidence interval from a sample of their best selling products. What does this tell you?

If Cantor’s Confectionery were to repeat the study several times, they would expect the average weight of a bag of sweets to lie between 73.04 grams and 76.96 grams, with 95 percent sign confidence.

If Lovelace’s Lollies were to repeat the study several times, they would expect the average weight of a box of lollies to lie between 81.88 and 86.12 grams, with 95 percent sign confidence.

The next example shows what these do not tell you.

Note
Example 6

The imminent rivalry between Cantor’s Confectionery and Lovelace’s Lollies has reached STARMAST News with the following headline:

“Here to compete with Cantor’s Confectionery: Lovelace’s Lollies guarantee that 95 percent sign of all boxes of lollies will weigh 86.12 grams”.

There are issues with this statement.

From the definition of a confidence level, you know that a confidence level suggests that if you were to repeat the study many times, you would expect the true estimate to fall within CLpercent sign of the results.

This is not the same as saying CLpercent sign of the products weigh a certain amount.

Instead, the STARMAST News headline should read

“Here to compete with Cantor’s Confectionery: A study on a sample of Lovelace’s Lollies suggest that if more boxes were to be sampled, they expect 95 percent sign of boxes would weigh between 81.88 and 86.12 grams”.

Finally, you can use a published confidence interval and some rearranging of equations to find out both the sample mean and sample standard deviation from a confidence interval.

Note
Example 7

Cantor’s Confectionery release a new “family-sized” bag of sweets to compete with Lovelace’s Lollies. They publish a news report on STARMAST News to counter some of the claims made by Lovelace’s Lollies.

“We’ve made a family-sized bag of sweets. Out of a sample of 81 bags, the 99 percent sign confidence interval was open bracket 100.00 g comma 104.00 g close bracket to two decimal places!

(Probably not the best PR people at Cantor’s Confectionery.)

Anyway, Lovelace’s Lollies have got hold of this news report and want you to investigate the sample mean and sample standard deviation of their competitor’s study. This is to compare their manufacturing processes with their sample standard deviation from Example 5.

You know that the sample mean is always at the centre of a confidence interval, and so here x bar equals the fraction with numerator 100.00 plus 104.00 and denominator 2 times g equals 102 g period To work out the sample standard deviation s, you will need to take the equation for the standard error and rearrange for s.

Here, the margin of error is the upper bound of the CI minus the sample mean, which is M E equals open paren 104 minus 102 close paren times g equals 2 g.

The confidence level is 99 percent sign. This means that alpha equals 0.01 and so, from the Z-value calculator: Z sub alpha divided by 2 equals Z sub 0.005 equals 2.576 period

The sample size is n equals 81, which means that the square root of n equals the square root of 81 equals 9.

So you will have to rearrange the equation 2 equals 2.576 times the fraction with numerator s and denominator the square root of 81 and doing so gives s equals the fraction with numerator 2 times 9 and denominator 2.576 equals 6.99 g to 2 dp period

This is the lowest sample standard deviation yet; it seems that Cantor’s Confectionery have better manufacturing facilities!

Quick check problems

Cantor’s Confectionery has constructed a 99 percent sign CI for the population mean length of their pulled taffy, which is open bracket 29.1 millimeters comma 32.9 millimeters close bracket. Below are three statements about this working; two are false, and one is true. Select the true statement:

There is a 99% probability that the population mean is in this interval.
99% of the sample data is within this interval.
It’s likely (to a 99% confidence level) that the population mean is in this interval.

What would your CL be for alpha equals 0.05?

85 percent sign

90 percent sign

95 percent sign

Answer: 
a
b
c
 .

What is the Z-value for alpha equals 0.1, to 4 decimal places?

Answer:  .

If a random variable X is normally distributed, which parameters are used?

Answer: 
n and Z
mu and n
mu and sigma
 .

What are the extremes of the normal distribution called?

Answer: 
ends
sides
tails
 .

Further reading

For more questions on the subject, please go to Questions: Introduction to confidence intervals.

If you would like to use a calculator to check your answers, please go to Calculator: Confidence intervals with normal distribution.

Version history