Your privacy is important to us

This website uses Google Analytics to measure traffic to and from the site, and to learn where our users come from. We use cookies to enable this service, alongside enabling our non-identifiable QuickCheck problem tracking. These are the sole purposes of enabling cookies on this website.

Home

About

News

Index

Study guides

Questions and answers

Facts and proofs

Apps

Latest content: New website features and statistical calculators available now! (02/05/25)

On this page

What is the chain rule?

Statement of the chain rule

Examples

Applications of the chain rule
  
  Derivatives of other common functions
  Other rules for differentiation
  Derivatives of scaled functions

Quick check problems

Further reading
  
  Version history

Other Formats

PDF

MS Word

The chain rule

CALCULUS

DIFFERENTIATION

AUTHOR

Tom Coleman

SUMMARY
The chain rule is one of three central techniques of differentiation, allowing you to differentiate any composition of two differentiable functions. This guide introduces the chain rule and explains examples of where it is used.

Before reading this guide, it is recommended that you read Guide: Introduction to differentiation and the derivative.

What is the chain rule?

In Guide: Introduction to differentiation and the derivative, you saw how valuable the idea of a derivative of a function is in determining the behaviour of that function. For instance, the derivative can be used to show if a function is increasing or decreasing at a point. Differentiation is commonly used in many subjects (physics, chemistry, biology, economics to name a few) to analyse behaviour of systems that change, and equations involving derivatives can be solved to explain this behaviour.

It was mentioned in that same guide that you are able to differentiate certain combinations of functions, such as the sum and difference of two functions, or scalar multiple of a single function. You need extra techniques to differentiate products, quotients, and compositions of functions; you will need the product rule, quotient rule, and chain rule respectively.

This guide will look at the chain rule for differentiation in order to find the derivative of a composition u of v of x of two functions. This guide explains the rule, where it comes from, and how the chain rule can be used.

The summary table of key derivatives from Guide: Introduction to differentiation and the derivative is reproduced here for reference:

Statement of the chain rule

Here is the statement of the chain rule:

The chain rule

Let u of x and v of x be two differentiable functions. Then the chain rule says that open paren u composed with v close paren prime of x equals normal d over normal d x times u of v of x equals u prime of v of x times v prime of x that is, the derivative of u of x composed with v of x with respect to x is equal to the product of the derivative of u with respect to v and the derivative of v with respect to x.

This can also be written as normal d over normal d x times u of v of x equals d u over d v times d v over d x period

Warning

It’s really important to keep track of variables throughout the chain rule.

Tip

The discovery of the chain rule is often credited to Gottfried Leibniz (link to Mactutor biography, external site), one of the co-founders of calculus (along with Isaac Newton); although he only used it on functions of the form the square root of a plus b x plus c x squared. The first ‘modern’ mention of the chain rule, over a century after Leibniz’ original usage, is due to Joseph-Louis Lagrange (link to Mactutor biography, external site).

Unlike the product rule (see Guide: The product rule), the choice of functions for the chain rule is prescribed; u of x is the function on the ‘outside’ and v of x is the function on the ‘inside’.

Sometimes f of x and g of x are written instead of u of x and v of x in the statement of the product rule. The reason that u of x and v of x is used here is that sometimes the function itself is called f of x; and you then can’t use it again!

To see why this really is the derivative of the quotient of two functions, please see Proof sheet: Rules of differentiation.

Examples

Warning

Although the statement of the chain rule uses more than one variable, all of your final answers should be in terms of the variable on the inside. This means that any derivative of f of g of x must be in terms of x, any derivative of u of v of t must be in terms of t and so on.

Example 1

What is the derivative of y equals e raised to the x cubed power?

In this case, you have a composition of two functions making y. The idea is to write y as e to the v-th power where v is a function of x. So here, the two functions are determined to be y equals e to the v-th power and v of x equals x cubed. In order to use the chain rule on y, you could differentiate y with respect to u and v with respect to x beforehand and then substitute them into the statement of the quotient rule. Doing this gives

For y of u equals e to the u-th power, then normal d y over normal d u equals e to the u-th power.

For u of x equals x cubed, then normal d u over normal d x equals 3 x squared.

Putting these into the statement of the chain rule gives

1 lines Line 1: d y over d x equals normal d y over normal d v times normal d v over normal d x equals e to the u-th power times 3 x squared but as mentioned, you should always leave your answer in terms of x. Luckily, u equals x cubed, and putting this in gives d y over d x equals 3 x squared e raised to the x cubed power and this is your final answer.

You don’t need to be so rigorous in your own working. Here’s another example of using the chain rule.

Example 2

What is the derivative of f of x equals l n of open paren x to the fifth power close paren with respect to x?

You can use the chain rule on f of x to differentiate with respect to x. You can infer that u of v equals l n of v and v of x equals x to the fifth power. Differentiating u with respect to v gives u prime of v of x equals 1 divided by v equals 1 divided by x to the fifth power and differentiating v with respect to x gives v prime of x equals 5 x to the fourth power. Putting these into the statement of the chain rule gives

1 lines Line 1: f prime of x equals u prime of v of x times v prime of x equals the fraction with numerator 1 and denominator x to the fifth power times 5 x to the fourth power equals the fraction with numerator 5 x to the fourth power and denominator x to the fifth power equals 5 over x

and this is your answer. Here, the answer has been simplified by using the laws of indices.

Here’s an example which will save you a lot of tedious bracket expanding!

Example 3

What is the derivative of y equals open paren x cubed plus 5 close paren to the seventh power with respect to x?

Prior to the chain rule, this may have required using the binomial theorem to expand these brackets and differentiate term by term (see [Guide: Binomial theorem] for more). However, you can use the chain rule on y to differentiate with respect to x. You can infer that u equals x cubed plus 5 and y equals u to the seventh power. Differentiating y with respect to u gives normal d y over normal d u equals 7 u to the sixth power, and differentiating u with respect to x gives normal d u over normal d x equals 3 x squared. Putting these into the statement of the chain rule gives

1 lines Line 1: normal d y over normal d x equals normal d y over normal d u times normal d u over normal d x equals 7 u to the sixth power times 3 x squared equals 21 x squared times open paren x cubed plus 5 close paren to the sixth power

and this is your answer.

The moral of this story (as it is also in the discussion of the product rule; see Guide: The product rule) is as follows:

Warning

If you are differentiating a function comprising of brackets to a large power, don’t expand the brackets! This only leads to extra work - and more opportunities for mistakes. Use the chain rule instead!

Here’s an example that combines the sum rule and the chain rule.

Example 4

Find the derivative of y equals the square root of 4 t to the fourth power minus 1 plus open paren t to the fourth power plus the cube root of t plus t to the negative 2 power close paren cubed.

In this case, you can see that there are two functions comprising y. Here, y equals f plus g where f of t equals the square root of 2 t to the fourth power minus 1 equals open paren 2 t to the fourth power minus 1 close paren raised to the exponent 1 divided by 2 end exponent and g of t equals open paren t to the fourth power plus the square root of t plus t to the negative 2 power close paren cubed You can notice that both f and g are compositions of functions. So you’ll need to use the chain rule on each function separately in order to find the derivative of y. Let’s do these in separate work areas, so that things aren’t confused.

For the derivative of f, you can notice that f of u equals the square root of u equals u raised to the 1 divided by 2 power and u equals 2 t to the fourth power minus 1 Differentiating f with respect to u and u with respect to t gives normal d f over normal d u equals open paren 1 divided by 2 close paren times u raised to the negative 1 divided by 2 power equals 1 over 2 the square root of u and normal d u over normal d t equals 8 t cubed Putting this into the formula for the chain rule and simplifying gives 1 lines Line 1: normal d f over normal d t equals normal d f over normal d u times normal d u over normal d t equals 1 over 2 the square root of u times 8 t cubed equals 8 t cubed over 2 the square root of 2 t to the fourth power plus 1 and this is the derivative of f with respect to t.

For the derivative of g, you can write that g of v equals v cubed and v equals t to the fourth power plus the square root of t plus t to the negative 2 power (Notice the use of v instead of u here!) Differentiating g with respect to v and v with respect to t gives normal d g over normal d v equals 3 v squared and normal d v over normal d t equals 4 t cubed plus the fraction with numerator t raised to the negative 1 divided by 2 power and denominator 2 minus 2 t to the negative 3 power Putting this into the formula for the chain rule and simplifying gives

2 lines Line 1: normal d g over normal d t equals normal d g over normal d v times normal d v over normal d t equals open paren 3 v squared close paren times open paren 4 t cubed plus the fraction with numerator t raised to the negative 1 divided by 2 power and denominator 2 minus 2 t to the negative 3 power close paren Line 2: blank equals open paren 12 t cubed plus 3 t raised to the negative 1 divided by 2 power over 2 minus 6 t to the negative 3 power close paren times open paren t to the fourth power plus the square root of t plus t to the negative 2 power close paren squared and this is the derivative of g with respect to t.

Finally, using the sum rule, you can say that 2 lines Line 1: normal d y over normal d t equals normal d f over normal d t plus normal d g over normal d t Line 2: blank equals 8 t cubed over 2 the square root of 2 t to the fourth power plus 1 plus open paren 12 t cubed plus 3 t raised to the negative 1 divided by 2 power over 2 minus 6 t to the negative 3 power close paren times open paren t to the fourth power plus the square root of x plus x to the negative 2 power close paren squared and this is your final answer.

Here’s another example:

Example 5

Find the derivative of the function f of x equals the fourth power of cosine x minus the fourth power of sine x.

Both terms of the function the fourth power of cosine x and the fourth power of sine x require the chain rule to differentiate. As in Example 3, you will need to be careful with this and do each term separately.

To differentiate the fourth power of cosine x, you can recognize this as a function g of h equals the fourth power of h (so g prime of h of x equals 4 h cubed) where h of x equals cosine x (so h prime of x equals negative sine x). Using the chain rule to differentiate this gives 2 lines Line 1: open paren g of open paren h of x close paren prime equals g prime of h of x times h prime of x Line 2: blank equals 4 h cubed times open paren negative sine x close paren equals negative 4 cosine cubed x sine x and so the derivative of the fourth power of cosine x is negative 4 cosine cubed x sine x.

To differentiate the fourth power of sine x, you can recognize this as a function u of v equals v to the fourth power (so u prime of v of x equals 4 v cubed) where v of x equals sine x (so v prime of x equals cosine x). Using the chain rule to differentiate this gives 2 lines Line 1: open paren u of open paren v of x close paren prime equals u prime of v of x times v prime of x Line 2: blank equals 4 v cubed times cosine x equals 4 sine cubed x sine x and so the derivative of the fourth power of sine x is 4 sine cubed x cosine x.

Therefore, putting these together using the difference rule gives: f prime of x equals minus open paren 4 cosine cubed x sine x plus 4 sine cubed x cosine x and this could be your final answer.

However, a little bit of factorization and knowledge of trigonometric identities (see Guide: Trigonometric identities (radians)) you can trim down this answer. As cosine squared x plus sine squared x equals 1 and sine 2 x equals 2 cosine x sine x, you can write

3 lines Line 1: f prime of x equals minus open paren 4 cosine cubed x sine x plus 4 sine cubed x cosine x Line 2: blank equals negative 4 cosine x sine x times open paren cosine squared x plus sine squared x close paren Line 3: blank equals negative 4 cosine x sine x equals negative 2 sine 2 x

and this is another acceptable final answer.

Tip

The trimmed answer in Example 5 is nice; you can recognize this as the derivative of cosine 2 x. So was all of this necessary? The answer is no; you don’t always need the chain rule to differentiate if the expression you are trying to differentiate can be written in a different way.

For instance, the function in Example 4 is f of x equals the fourth power of cosine x minus the fourth power of sine x which, by the difference of two squares is equal to f of x equals open paren cosine squared x plus sine squared x close paren times open paren cosine squared x minus sine squared x close paren period Using trigonometric identities, you can say that cosine squared x plus sine squared x equals 1 and cosine 2 x equals cosine squared x minus sine squared x, and so f of x equals cosine 2 x. This can then be differentiated, with the same answer as in Example 4!

In short, it’s always good to explore alternative ways of writing mathematical expressions to save you a little work.

Here’s another example which requires multiple uses of the chain rule.

Example 6

Find the derivative of y equals the sine of l n of open paren x to the negative 2 power close paren.

In this situation you can write y as y of u of x, where y of u equals sine u and u of x equals l n of open paren x to the negative 2 power close paren Differentiating y of u with respect to u is something that you can do, but you can see that in order to differentiate u of x with respect to x, you’ll need to apply the chain rule!

So, to find the derivative of u with respect to x, you can write u of v equals l n of v and v of x equals x to the negative 2 power Differentiating u with respect to v and v with respect to x gives d u over d v equals 1 over v and d v over d x equals negative 2 x to the negative 3 power Putting this into the formula for the chain rule (and carefully using the laws of indices) gives d u over d x equals d u over d v times d v over d x equals 1 over v times open paren negative 2 x to the negative 3 power close paren equals the fraction with numerator negative 2 x to the negative 3 power and denominator x to the negative 2 power equals negative 2 x to the negative 1 power equals negative 2 over x

Now, you can go back to the initial problem. Thanks to your work differentiating u with respect to x, you can say that d y over d u equals cosine u and d u over d x equals negative 2 over x Finally, putting this into the formula for the chain rule, and remembering to give your answer only in terms of x, gives d y over d x equals d y over d u times d u over d x equals cosine u times open paren negative 2 over x close paren equals the fraction with numerator negative 2 the cosine of l n of open paren x to the negative 2 power close paren and denominator x

and this is your final answer.

Since d u over d x equals d u over d v times d v over d x, it follows that for the composition of three functions y equals u of v of x, the derivative is given by: d y over d x equals d y over d u times d u over d v times d v over d x In fact, you can use repeated applications of the chain rule to find the derivative of any finite number of composed functions.

Applications of the chain rule

Derivatives of other common functions

You can use the chain rule to work out some derivatives of some other trigonometric functions. In Guide: Trigonometry (radians), you saw that tangent x equals sine x over cosine x secant x equals 1 over cosine x cosecant x equals 1 over sine x cotangent x equals 1 over tangent x equals cosine x over sine x are the other circular trigonometric functions. By using the chain rule, you can find the derivatives of secant x and cosecant x.

Example 7

What is the derivative of f of x equals 1 over cosine x with respect to x?

You can use the chain rule on f of x to differentiate with respect to x. You can infer that u of v equals 1 divided by v equals v to the negative 1 power and v of x equals cosine x. Differentiating u with respect to v gives u prime of v of x equals negative the negative second power of v equals negative 1 divided by cosine squared x and differentiating v with respect to x gives v prime of x equals negative sine x. Putting these into the statement of the chain rule gives

1 lines Line 1: f prime of x equals u prime of v of x times v prime of x equals open paren negative 1 over cosine squared x close paren times open paren negative sine x close paren equals sine x over cosine squared x

and this is your answer. You could also use the fact that tangent x equals sine x divided by cosine x to say that f prime of x equals sine x over cosine squared x equals secant x tangent x period

In a similar way, you can find the derivative of f of x equals cosecant x to be equal to f prime of x equals negative cosecant x cotangent x period

Other rules for differentiation

The process of differentiating secant x and cosecant x can be generalized to find the derivative of the reciprocal of any function, not only cosine x and sine x. If you can use the chain rule to demonstrate a general formula for the derivative of 1 divided by f of x, you can not only use this general formula to differentiate secant x and cosecant x, but any other reciprocal function. This is a common technique amongst mathematicians; find the most general formula possible to apply to as many situations as you can. Let’s take a look at the reciprocal rule:

Example 8 (reciprocal rule)

You can use the chain rule to prove the reciprocal rule, which says that if f of x is not equal to 0 for all x, then open paren 1 over f of x close paren prime equals the fraction with numerator negative f of x and denominator open paren f of x close paren squared period

The function you are trying to differentiate is y equals 1 divided by f of x, so you can use the chain rule with y of u equals 1 divided by u equals u to the negative 1 power and u of x equals f of x. Differentiating y with respect to u gives normal d y over normal d u equals negative u to the negative 2 power equals negative 1 divided by u squared, and differentiating u with respect to x gives normal d u over normal d x equals f prime of x. Putting these into the chain rule gives:

1 lines Line 1: d y over d x equals normal d y over normal d u times normal d u over normal d x equals open paren negative the fraction with numerator 1 and denominator u squared close paren times f prime of x equals the fraction with numerator negative f prime of x and denominator open paren f of x close paren squared

and this is exactly the reciprocal rule.

Tip

You could also use the quotient rule to prove the reciprocal rule is true. See Guide: The quotient rule for more.

For instance, you can use the reciprocal rule with f of x equals sine x (so f prime of x equals cosine x) to write that normal d over normal d x times cosecant x equals normal d over normal d x times open paren 1 over sine x close paren equals the fraction with numerator negative cosine x and denominator sine squared x equals negative cosecant x cotangent x period

In fact, you can use the chain rule to prove ‘rules’ for differentation of functions composed with other functions. For instance, in Example 1, you saw that the derivative of e raised to the x cubed power is equal to 3 x squared e raised to the x cubed power. Taking f of x equals x cubed, you can see that this is equal to the derivative f prime of x equals 3 x squared multiplied by e raised to the f of x power. It follows that you can use the chain rule to prove that, for any function f of x: normal d over normal d x times open paren e raised to the f of x power close paren equals f prime of x e raised to the f of x power

Similarly, in Example 2, you saw that the derivative of f of x equals l n of open paren x to the fifth power close paren was 5 x to the fourth power divided by x to the fifth power, which is the derivative of x to the fifth power divided by x to the fifth power. This is no coincidence; using the chain rule, you can show that for any function f of x: normal d over normal d x times l n of f of x equals f prime of x over f of x

Derivatives of scaled functions

In Guide: Introduction to differentiation and the derivative, a list of common derivatives was given, and then almost immediately expanded upon - the list is reproduced above. It was mentioned that the chain rule was used to find these expanded derivatives; but why was this the case? The answer is that is because of the b x in the arguments of the function. Technically, an expression like f of x equals a cosine b x is the composition of two functions, f of u equals a cosine u and u of x equals b x. Since the derivative of u equals b x is u prime equals b, this is where the b comes from in f prime of x equals negative a b sine b x.

In general, you can apply this to any function of x. Using the chain rule, you can prove that if f is any differentiable function, and a comma b comma c are real numbers with b is not equal to 0, then d over d x times open paren a f of open paren b x plus c close paren close paren equals a b f prime of open paren b x plus c close paren period

This then allows you to quickly work out derivatives of powers of linear expressions b x plus c:

Example 9

You can use the chain rule to show that: d over d x times open paren open paren b x plus c close paren to the n-th power close paren equals b n times open paren b x plus c close paren raised to the n minus 1 power period

The function you are trying to differentiate is y equals open paren b x plus c close paren to the n-th power, so you can use the chain rule with y of u equals u to the n-th power and u of x equals b x plus c. Differentiating y with respect to u gives normal d y over normal d u equals n u raised to the n minus 1 power, and differentiating u with respect to x gives normal d u over normal d x equals b. Putting these into the chain rule gives:

1 lines Line 1: d y over d x equals normal d y over normal d u times normal d u over normal d x equals n u raised to the n minus 1 power times b equals b n u raised to the n minus 1 power equals b n times open paren b x plus c close paren raised to the n minus 1 power

and this is exactly as said above. A similar method can be applied to powers of any function you know how to differentiate.

Quick check problems

Using the chain rule, match the following six functions to their derivatives with respect to x. One of the derivatives given does not match a function; you should select which one in the final sentence below.

where

negative 18 x squared the sine of open paren 3 x cubed close paren

18 x the cosine of open paren 2 x cubed close paren

negative 18 x the sine of open paren 3 x squared close paren

27 x squared the cosine of open paren 3 x cubed close paren

negative 18 x squared the sine of open paren 3 x squared close paren

18 x the cosine of open paren 3 x squared close paren

12 x squared the cosine of open paren 2 x cubed close paren

So 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
 is the odd derivative out.

Further reading

For more questions on the subject, please go to Questions: The chain rule.

For more about techniques of differentiation, please see Guide: The product rule, and Guide: The quotient rule.

For more about why the rules and techniques of differentiation are true, please see Proof sheet: Rules of differentiation.

Version history

v1.0: initial version created 05/25 by tdhc.

This work is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0.

Mailing List

Sign up to be notified of new study guides or additional features!

You have successfully joined our subscriber list.

Feedback

Your feedback is appreciated and useful. Feel free to leave a comment here,
but please be specific with any issues you encounter so we can help to resolve them
(for example, what page it occured on, what you tried, and so on).

Don't fill this out if you're human:

About

Index

Cookie policy

STARMAST © 2025 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0.