Solving equations involving logarithms

SOLVING EQUATIONS

ALGEBRA

AUTHOR

Krish Chaudhary, Tom Coleman, Ellie Gurini, Mark Toner

SUMMARY
This guide discusses the idea of rearranging and solving equations involving logarithms, which is a key skill in both mathematics and many areas of science.

Before reading this, it is strongly recommended that you read Guide: Introduction to logarithms. Examples 7 and 8 require solving quadratic equations: see Guide: Factorization or Guide: Using the quadratic formula for more on this.

In Guide: Introduction to logarithms, you learned about the different ways that you can manipulate expressions involving logarithms, such as the log base 2 of 15 and natural log of open paren x cubed close paren. In a more general setting however, this knowledge may not be enough; you will need to apply the ideas of logarithms to help you solve equations.

Solving equations involving logarithms is a key skill in areas whenever logarithmic concepts play a role: economics, physics (particularly acoustics, where the decibel is a logarithmic measure), chemistry (pH is a logarithmic measure), biology, mathematics and statistics, computational complexity, and even music theory!

Before you dive in to solving logarithms, it is worth restating the recommendation above:

Important

This guide assumes a prior knowledge of logarithms and the laws of logarithms. Please make sure that you have read Guide: Introduction to logarithms before continuing.

The numbering of the laws will follow the numbering in this guide and on Factsheet: Laws of logarithms.

Discussion of techniques

In general, the first golden rule of solving equations involving logarithms is the following:

Tip
First golden rule

Make sure all logarithms are in the same base before simplifying. To do this (if applicable) you could use the change of base rule.

This is because Laws 1 and 2 of the laws of logarithms can only be applied when the logarithms have the same base.

It may be that you have logarithms in different bases in your equation; so how can you make them to be in the same base? The answer is the change of base rule (Law 6) which you can use in this scenario.

You have seen in Guide: Introduction to logarithms that logarithms undo exponentiation and exponentiation undoes logarithms. More formally, you have that for all a is greater than 0 with a is not equal to 1 and all real numbers y (where the expression is defined):

a raised to the log base a of y power equals y and the log base a of open paren a to the y-th power close paren equals y However, this only works if there is one term on each side of the equation. For instance, you can notice that the log base a of x plus the log base a of y equals the log base a of z does not automatically imply that x plus y equals z. This is because looking at Law 1 of the laws of logarithms, it follows that the log base a of x plus the log base a of y equals log base a x y equals the log base a of z and so it actually implies that x y equals z.

So once the first golden rule has been applied and all logarithms are in the same base, then the second golden rule of solving equations involving logarithms is the following:

Tip
Second golden rule

There should not be a coefficient in front of any logarithms, and you need exactly one term on each side of the equation. Then, and only then, can you undo the logarithm by exponentiation.

So for instance, if you are solving an equation involving logarithms, you can isolate the variable on one side of the equation, and have a constant on the other (see Guide: Introduction to rearranging equations for more). Perhaps it looks like the log base a of x equals b. From there, you can exponentiate both sides with base a to get a raised to the log base a of x power equals x equals a to the b-th power and so x equals a to the b-th power.

However, please be aware of the following:

Warning

You cannot take logarithms of a negative number!

So if you are solving an equation involving logarithms, you need to check if the solution is valid by putting any answers into your original equation. This is outlined in Examples XX and XX.

Initial examples

The first four examples examine exactly where the golden rules are used.

Note
Example 1

Solve the log base 10 of open paren 5 x plus 7 close paren equals 1 for x.

Here, there is only one logarithm and so all logarithms are in the same base, which agrees with the first golden rule from above.

Next, you can notice there is exactly one term on both sides of the equation, which agrees with the second golden rule from above.

Now, you can undo the logarithm by exponentiating both sides to base 10. This gives

3 lines Line 1: the log base 10 of open paren 5 x plus 7 close paren equals 1 Line 2: 10 raised to the log base 10 of open paren 5 x plus 7 close paren power equals 10 to the first power Line 3: 5 x plus 7 equals 10 This is a linear equation in x that you can solve by rearranging for x. From there, you can subtract 7 from both sides, giving 3 equals 5 x and then divide both sides by 5, giving x equals three fifths as a final answer.

You may also come across equations which are similar to the one above, but hidden through laws of logarithms. Here are two examples which require this kind of manipulation.

Note
Example 2

Solve log base 2 4 t minus the log base 2 of 3 equals 2 for t.

Here, all logarithms are in the same base (2), which agrees with the first golden rule from above.

There are two terms on the left hand side, which doesn’t agree with the second golden rule. You will need to use the laws of logarithms to combine the two logarithms into one term. Using Law 2 (see Factsheet: Laws of logarithms) on the left hand side of the equation gives log base 2 4 t minus the log base 2 of 3 equals the log base 2 of open paren 4 t over 3 close paren The equation then becomes the log base 2 of open paren 4 t over 3 close paren equals 2 which agrees with the second golden rule as there is one term on both sides of the equation.

This means you can now undo the logarithm. Exponentiating both sides with base 2 gives 3 lines Line 1: the log base 2 of open paren 4 t over 3 close paren equals 2 Line 2: 2 raised to the open paren 4 t divided by 3 close paren power equals 2 squared Line 3: 4 t over 3 equals 4

To finish solving, you can divide both sides by 4 and multiply both sides by 3. This gives t equals 3.

Note
Example 3

Rearrange z equals 4 the log base 3 of x plus the log base 3 of y for x.

Here, all logarithms are in the same base (3), which agrees with the first golden rule from above.

There are two terms on the right hand side, which doesn’t agree with the second golden rule. You will need to use the laws of logarithms to combine the two logarithms into one term. Since there is a plus, Law 1 seems appropriate. However, the statement of Law 1 doesn’t have coefficients in the logs; you need to deal with that 4 before you can do this.

Using Law 3, you can write that 4 the log base 3 of x equals the log base 3 of open paren x to the fourth power close paren and so the equation becomes z equals 4 the log base 3 of x plus the log base 3 of y equals the log base 3 of open paren x to the fourth power close paren plus the log base 3 of y It’s now you can use Law 1 to combine the logarithms to get z equals the log base 3 of open paren x to the fourth power close paren plus the log base 3 of y equals the log base 3 of open paren x to the fourth power y close paren The equation is now z equals the log base 3 of open paren x to the fourth power y close paren which agrees with the second golden rule as there is one term on both sides of the equation.

This means you can now undo the logarithm. Exponentiating both sides with base 3 gives 3 lines Line 1: z equals the log base 3 of open paren x to the fourth power y close paren Line 2: 3 to the z-th power equals 3 raised to the exponent log base 3 of open paren x to the fourth power y close paren end exponent Line 3: 3 to the z-th power equals x to the fourth power y

To finish solving, you can divide both sides by y to get x to the fourth power equals 3 to the z-th power divided by y. You can now take fourth roots of both sides to get the final answer x equals the fourth root of the fraction with numerator 3 to the z-th power and denominator y period

This example will make use of the change of base formula stated above (which is Law 6 of the laws of logarithms). Here’s a reminder of the change of base formula from Factsheet: Laws of logarithms.

Note
Change of base formula

the log base a of x equals the log base k of x over the log base k of a or alternatively the log base k of a the log base a of x equals the log base k of x

Note
Example 4

Rearrange the log base 9 of open paren x plus y close paren equals the log base 3 of x for y.

Here, not all logarithms are in the same base, so you will need to use the change of base formula. You can either change everything into base 3 or everything into base 9. Since the inside of the right hand side logarithm is simpler than the left hand side, let’s change that into base 9.

Using the change of base rule with a equals 3 and k equals 9 gives the log base 3 of x equals the log base 9 of x over the log base 9 of 3 period Now, you can see that as 9 raised to the 1 divided by 2 power equals 3, then the log base 9 of 3 equals 1 divided by 2. This means that the log base 3 of x equals the fraction with numerator 1 and denominator 1 divided by 2 the log base 9 of x equals 2 the log base 9 of x. Putting this into the equation gives the log base 9 of open paren x plus y close paren equals 2 the log base 9 of x period Now all of the logarithms are in the same base, satisfying the first golden rule.

However, the logarithm on the right hand side still has a coefficient, which you can incorporate into the logarithm using Law 3. Doing this, you can write that 2 the log base 9 of x equals the log base 9 of open paren x squared close paren and so the equation becomes the log base 9 of open paren x plus y close paren equals the log base 9 of open paren x squared close paren The equation now which agrees with the second golden rule as there is one term on both sides of the equation, and there are no coefficients on the logarithms.

This means you can now undo the logarithm. Exponentiating both sides with base 9 gives 3 lines Line 1: the log base 9 of open paren x plus y close paren equals the log base 9 of open paren x squared close paren Line 2: 9 raised to the log base 9 of open paren x plus y close paren power equals 9 raised to the exponent log base 9 of open paren x squared close paren end exponent Line 3: x plus y equals x squared

To finish solving, you can take x from both sides to get y equals x squared minus x and this is your final answer.

Here’s an example that combines many laws of logarithms:

Note
Example 5

If the log base 8 of x plus the log base 2 of y equals the log base 2 of open paren 4 y plus 1 close paren comma represent y in terms of x.

Here, not all logarithms are in the same base, so you will need to use the change of base formula. You can either change everything into base 2 or everything into base 8. Since there is only one logarithm in base 8 and two in base 2, it’s less work to change everything into base 2.

Using the change of base rule with a equals 8 and k equals 2 gives the log base 8 of x equals the log base 2 of x over the log base 2 of 8 period Now, you can see that the log base 2 of 8 equals 3, as 2 cubed equals 8. This means that the log base 8 of x equals one third the log base 2 of x. Putting this into the equation gives one third the log base 2 of x plus the log base 2 of y equals the log base 2 of open paren 4 y plus 1 close paren period Now all of the logarithms are in the same base, satisfying the first golden rule. There are two terms on the left hand side, which doesn’t agree with the second golden rule.

You will need to use the laws of logarithms to combine the two logarithms into one term. Since there is a plus, Law 1 seems appropriate. However, like as in Example 3, the statement of Law 1 doesn’t have coefficients in the logs; you need to deal with that 4 before you can do this.

Using Law 3, you can write that one third the log base 2 of x equals the log base 2 of open paren x raised to the 1 divided by 3 power close paren and so the equation becomes the log base 2 of open paren x raised to the 1 divided by 3 power close paren plus the log base 2 of y equals the log base 2 of open paren 4 y plus 1 close paren It’s now you can use Law 1 to combine the logarithms to get the log base 2 of open paren x raised to the 1 divided by 3 power close paren plus the log base 2 of y equals the log base 2 of open paren x raised to the 1 divided by 3 power y close paren The equation is now the log base 2 of open paren x raised to the 1 divided by 3 power y close paren equals the log base 2 of open paren 4 y plus 1 close paren which agrees with the second golden rule as there is one term on both sides of the equation.

This means you can now undo the logarithm. Exponentiating both sides with base 2 gives 3 lines Line 1: the log base 2 of open paren x raised to the 1 divided by 3 power y close paren equals the log base 2 of open paren 4 y plus 1 close paren Line 2: 2 raised to the exponent log base 2 of open paren x raised to the 1 divided by 3 power y close paren end exponent equals 2 raised to the log base 2 of open paren 4 y plus 1 close paren power Line 3: x raised to the 1 divided by 3 power y equals 4 y plus 1 You can rearrange the equation for y (using techniques from Guide: Rearranging equations) to get y equals negative the fraction with numerator 1 and denominator 4 minus x raised to the one third power as your final answer.

Solving logarithmic equations

The following extra examples on solving logarithmic equations will explain the process in a more natural and less structured manner. These are designed

Note
Example 6

If the log base 3 of open paren 2 x minus 3 close paren equals the log base 9 of open paren x squared close paren, what is x?

In this case, you need to follow the first golden rule and make sure that both of your logarithms are to the same base. Since 9 equals 3 squared, it makes sense to change the base of the right hand side, which is the log base 9 of open paren x squared close paren. Using the change of base rule gives the log base 9 of open paren x squared close paren equals the fraction with numerator the log base 3 of open paren x squared close paren and denominator the log base 3 of 9 Since 9 equals 3 squared, it follows that the log base 3 of 9 equals 2 and so the fraction with numerator the log base 3 of open paren x squared close paren and denominator the log base 3 of 9 equals one half the log base 3 of open paren x squared close paren By the laws of logs and the laws of indices: one half the log base 3 of open paren x squared close paren equals the log base 3 of open paren x squared raised to the exponent 1 divided by 2 end exponent close paren equals the log base 3 of x So the equation is now the log base 3 of open paren 2 x minus 3 close paren equals the log base 3 of x which is easier to deal with. Exponentiating both sides with base 3 gives 3 lines Line 1: the log base 3 of open paren 2 x minus 3 close paren equals the log base 3 of x Line 2: 3 raised to the log base 3 of open paren 2 x minus 3 close paren power equals 3 raised to the log base 3 of x power Line 3: 2 x minus 3 equals x Rearranging this equation gives x equals 3.

Since the equation started with logarithms, you need to check if this gives valid solutions. When x equals 3, then both 2 x minus 3 and x squared are positive; so in this case the equation is defined and x equals 3 is a valid solution.

Note
Example 7

Solve 2 natural log of open paren x minus 4 close paren equals natural log of open paren 10 divided by 3 minus x close paren plus natural log of 3.

Here, you’ll need to combine the logs on the right hand side. It also can’t hurt to get rid of that 2 as well. So, by the laws of logs, you can rewrite the equation as 3 lines Line 1: 2 natural log of open paren x minus 4 close paren equals natural log of open paren 10 divided by 3 minus x close paren plus natural log of 3 Line 2: natural log open paren x minus 4 close paren squared equals natural log of open paren 3 times open paren 10 divided by 3 minus x close paren close paren Line 3: natural log open paren x minus 4 close paren squared equals natural log of open paren 10 minus 3 x close paren Exponentiating both sides with base e gives: 3 lines Line 1: natural log open paren x minus 4 close paren squared equals natural log of open paren 10 minus 3 x close paren Line 2: e raised to the exponent natural log of open paren x minus 4 close paren squared end exponent equals e raised to the natural log of open paren 10 minus 3 x close paren power Line 3: open paren x minus 4 close paren squared equals open paren 10 minus 3 x close paren Expanding the brackets on both sides and simplifying gives 3 lines Line 1: open paren x minus 4 close paren squared equals open paren 10 minus 3 x close paren Line 2: x squared minus 8 x plus 16 equals 10 minus 3 x Line 3: x squared minus 5 x plus 6 equals 0 You can factorize this quadratic equation (see Guide: Factorization for more) or use the quadratic formula (see Guide: Using the quadratic formula) to get open paren x minus 2 close paren times open paren x minus 3 close paren equals 0, so x equals 2 or x equals 3.

However, neither of these are valid solutions to the equation! The original equation is 2 natural log of open paren x minus 4 close paren equals natural log of open paren 10 divided by 3 minus x close paren plus natural log of 3 and so any potential solution has to be greater than 4; this is because you can’t have the logarithm of a negative number. Since x minus 4 is negative for both x equals 2 and x equals 3, you can say that there are no real solutions to this equation.

Here’s another example which has.

Note
Example 8

Solve the log base 10 of 4 equals the log base 10 of open paren x plus 1 close paren plus the log base 10 of open paren x minus 4 close paren.

Using the laws of logs on the right hand side gives the log base 10 of open paren x plus 1 close paren plus the log base 10 of open paren x minus 4 close paren equals the log base 10 of open paren x plus 1 close paren times open paren x minus 4 close paren and so, exponentiating both sides to base 10: 3 lines Line 1: the log base 10 of 4 equals the log base 10 of open paren x plus 1 close paren times open paren x minus 4 close paren Line 2: 10 raised to the log base 10 of 4 power equals 10 raised to the log base 10 of open paren x plus 1 close paren times open paren x minus 4 close paren power Line 3: 4 equals open paren x plus 1 close paren times open paren x minus 4 close paren Expanding the brackets and rearranging gives 3 lines Line 1: 4 equals open paren x plus 1 close paren times open paren x minus 4 close paren Line 2: 4 equals x squared minus 3 x minus 4 Line 3: 0 equals x squared minus 3 x minus 8 You can use the quadratic formula to solve this quadratic equation (see Guide: Using the quadratic formula) with a equals 1, b equals negative 3 and c equals negative 8 to get x equals the fraction with numerator negative negative 3 plus or minus the square root of open paren negative 3 close paren squared minus 4 times 1 times negative 8 and denominator 2 times 1 equals the fraction with numerator 3 plus or minus the square root of 41 and denominator 2 period

However, you need to check if these answers are valid! You can check to see that the square root of 41 almost equals 6.40312, so the square root of 41 is greater than 6.

You can say that 3 plus the square root of 41 is greater than 9, and so open paren 3 plus the square root of 41 close paren divided by 2 is greater than 9 divided by 2 is greater than 4. As both the log base 10 of open paren x plus 1 close paren and the log base 10 of open paren x minus 4 close paren are defined when x is greater than 4, it follows x equals open paren 3 plus the square root of 41 close paren divided by 2 is a valid solution.

Next, you can say that 3 minus the square root of 41 is less than negative 3 is less than 0. Since the log base 10 of open paren x minus 4 close paren is undefined for any x is less than or equal to 4, it follows that x equals open paren 3 minus the square root of 41 close paren divided by 2 is not a valid solution.

So the only solution to this equation is x equals open paren 3 plus the square root of 41 close paren divided by 2.

Quick check problems

Solve the following logarithmic equations:

the log base 3 of 5 x plus 4 equals 2

Answer: x equals

the log base 10 of 5 x minus the log base 10 of 9 equals 3

Answer: x equals

2 the log base 4 of 3 plus the log base 2 of open paren x plus 5 close paren equals 2

Answer: t equals

You are asked to solve the following expression: the log base 10 of open paren p plus 6 close paren equals 2 the log base 10 of open paren p minus 6 close paren.

Select the correct answer from the drop down box.

Answer: 
p = 3, p = 10, and both solutions are valid.
p = 3, p = 10, but only p = 3 is valid.
p = 3, p = 10, but only p = 10 is valid.
p = 3, p = 10, but neither solution is valid.

Further reading

For more questions on the subject, please go to Questions: Solving equations involving logarithms.

Version history